Released: 3rd Feb Deadline: 16th Feb
Problem Set 2
INF266- Reinforcement Learning
Spring 2026
IMPORTANT: Submission of this problem set is compulsory to be admitted to
the final exam and graduate from the course.
Part I.
Problems
In the first part ( Problems), you are required to provide answers for all the oblig-
atory questions, that is, questions marked by a star ( *). The remaining questions
are optional; however, you are invited to solve them because: (i) they are stepping-
stones towards the obligatory questions; (ii) they are similar to the questions you
will be asked at the exam.
1. Markov Models and Bellman Equations
Exercise1 Markov Processes
Consider the following scenario: a Mars Rover module has been designed to
autonomously explore the surface of Mars. Every ten minutes, the module runs
its program to transition to a new state. If it is in the normal operative mode of
exploration, it will remain in that state with 70% chance and it will keep exploring
for the next ten minutes; otherwise it will select uniformly at random among the
following three alternatives: taking pictures of the sky, taking samples from the
ground, recharging. If it selects taking pictures, it will spend ten minutes taking
snapshots of the skies; then, it will revert to exploration with 60% chance or it will
take samples from the ground with the remaining probability. If it ends up taking
samples from the ground, it will dig for ten minutes; afterward, it will go back to
normal operation mode with 35% chance, recharge with 30% chance, dig for more
samples with 30% chance, or experience a malfunctioning with 5% chance. If it
selects recharging, it will stay put for ten minutes collecting energy through its solar
panels; after that, it will revert to normal exploration mode. If it experiences a
malfunction, the robot will just shutdown.

1. ( *) How can this model comply with the assumption of Markovianity?
2. ( *) Express the problem as a Markov Process. Write down its definition and
draw its graph.
3. If the robot is in the normal operative mode, are all the states reachable? Is
there any state that compromises the reachability of other states?
4. If the robot is in the normal operative mode, what is the probability of
malfunctioning in the next 10 minutes? In the next 20 minutes? In the next
30 minutes?
5. ( *) How would the model change if you were to be told that the probability of
experiencing a malfunction in the digging state would depend on the number
of times the robot has been extracting samples?
Consider the tic-tac-toe1 game, where the players are hard-coded computer pro-
grams.
6. Can you express this model as an MP? (You do not need to write out explicitly
the graph).
7. How many states do you count? (Approximate answers are fine) What does
this tell you about scalability?
Exercise2 Markov Reward Processes
Enrich the previous Mars Rover scenario with the following rewards: 0 for normal
exploration, +5 for taking pictures of the skies, +20 for collecting samples from the
ground, 0 for recharging, −100 for malfunctioning.
1. ( *) Redraw the graph for the previous MP as a graph for this new MRP.
2. If the robot is in the normal operative mode, what is the reward you would
expect it to collect in the next 10 minutes? What is the probability of a
negative reward within 20 minutes?
Exercise3 Markov Decision Processes
Reconsider the previous MRP for the Mars Rover scenario.
1. ( *) Can you model it as a MDP? How would you now model actions, states,
transitions and policies?
2. Consider the two objectives of maximizing rewards and minimizing the prob-
ability of failure. Assuming the same transitions as in the MRP, would the
optimal policy for the two objectives be the same? Would the answer depend
on the time horizon?
3. ( *) Reconsider the multi-armed bandit problem, for instance, the first prob-
lem in Exercise 8 of Problem Assignment 1. Can you formalize it as a MDP?
How would it be?
4. In class, we have discussed how MPs and MRPs captures important aspects
of RL, but they are not sufficient to model meaningful RL problems. We
have then chosen MDPs as the minimal models that capture all the relevant
aspects of RL that we may care about. Is there any aspect of what you would
consider an interesting RL problem that is not captured by MDPs?
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tic-tac-toe
2

Exercise4 Bellman equations
In class we discussed Bellman equations for MDPs.
1. ( *) Can you define Bellman equations for a MP? If yes, draw the correspond-
ing backup diagrams and derive the Bellman equations. If not, explain why
not.
2. ( *) Can you define Bellman expectation equations for a MRP? If yes, draw
the corresponding backup diagrams and derive the Bellman equations. If not,
explain why not.
3. ( *) Can you define Bellman optimality equations for a MRP? If yes, draw
the corresponding backup diagrams and derive the Bellman equations. If not,
explain why not.
4. In class we also derived the state-value Bellman expectation equation for an
MDP, but we skipped the whole derivation of the action-value Bellman expec-
tation equation. Write out the full derivation from qπ(a, s) = E[G(t)|S(t) =
s, A(t) = a] to qπ(a, s) = E[R(0) + γqπ(a′, s′)|S(t) = s, A(t) = a]
5. Consider state-value Bellman expectation equations. They define a linear
system. Can you rewrite them in matrix form? (Hint: start from the Bellman
expectation equation and isolate a matrix for the rewards and a matrix for
the transitions.)
6. Why and when would be useful to express Bellman expectation equations in
matrix form?
Exercise5 Optimality
1. Is the value vπ(s) of a state s an absolute/objective value? If not, what does
it depend upon?
2. Must an optimal policy always be deterministic?
3. What is the implication of a deterministic policy for the exploration-exploitation
trade-off?
4. Assume I run an optimal policy π∗ and an alternative policy π′. Is the optimal
policy always guaranteed to achieve the highest return against π′ on every
run?
3

Part II.
Report
In the second part ( Report), you are required to provide a
report of maximum 2 pages describing the experiments you have run and
analyzed to answer the obligatory questions, that is, questions marked by a star
(*). The remaining questions are optional; however, you are invited to solve them
because: (i) they are stepping-stones towards the obligatory questions; (ii) they
are similar to the questions you will be asked at the exam. You will be evaluated
only on your report. Review the documents on coding tips and writing tips
for advices on how to tackle this part.
Exercise6 Dynamic Programming
Consider a robot searching an optimal path down the side of a mountain. Its aim
is to find the fastest route to the root of the mountain, avoiding to traverse terrain
that is too rough and uneven.
We will represent the side of the mountain as agridworld made up by 31 rows and
100 columns (see image below). Some facts about the dynamics of the environment:
• The robot will start somewhere in the first column on the left (top of the
mountain).
• The robot aims at reaching the rightmost column on the right (bottom of the
mountain).
• Each square has a roughness index providing a reward signal of how fast the
robot can move through that square.
• Because of the slope, at each timestep the robot can only choose whether to
advance straight to the right , diagonally to the top right , or diagonally to the
bottom right.
• If the robot attempt to move beyond the map in the top or bottom direction,
it will fail to escape and just move straight ahead.
IMPORTANT: Pay attention to the encoding, as the indexing of the matrix
may be counterintuitive. Notice that (0,0) is on the top-left corner!
1. Express this problem formally as a MDP.
4

The robot now wants to evaluate some alternative strategies relying on a model of
the mountain it has acquired. Load the model Mountain one() in mountain.py
and implement an algorithm for policy evaluation.
2. Consider the policy πstr of heading straight ahead. Use policy evaluation to
compute vπstr.
3. ( *) Run your policy evaluation ordering the states from left to right (from
the top of the mountain to the bottom) or from right to left (from the bottom
of the mountain to the top). How do the results differ?
4. ( *) Consider the two polices evaluation in run with the different ordering of
states. Did you learn something different between them?
5. Plot the trajectory followed by the robot according to πstr from s0 = (15, 0).
6. Plot the trajectory followed by the robot according to πstr from s0 = (3, 0).
7. If the agent were to follow the policy πstr, which starting position in the first
column would be optimal?
8. Consider now a random policy πrnd where each action is taken with uniform
probability. Use policy evaluation to compute vπrnd.
9. Plot one sample trajectory that the robot could follow according to πrnd from
s0 = (15, 0).
10. ( *) Did you learn something different between the policy evaluation for vπstr
and vπrnd?
11. ( *) Compare vπstr((15, 0)), vπstr((3, 0)), vπrnd((15, 0)). If the robot can choose
its initial position and its policy, which of the previous combination of initial
state and policy has the highest value?
12. Reconsider the three policy evaluation that you have run. Is the issue of
exploration affecting the final result?
Instead of just evaluating possible policies, the robot now considers trying to learn
an optimal policy. Implement an algorithm for policy iteration.
13. Start from πrnd; find an optimal policy using standard policy iteration where
you alternate: (i) policy evaluation until the state values are stable (they
change less than a ϵ threshold); and, (ii) policy improvement.
14. Plot the optimal trajectory.
15. Always start from πrnd; find an optimal policy using truncated policy iteration
where you alternate: (i) k = 3 steps of policy evaluation; and, (ii) policy
improvement.
16. Plot the optimal trajectory.
17. Start at s0 = (15, 0) and πrnd; find an optimal policy using value iteration.
Implement value iteration both as a form of k = 1 truncated policy iteration
and as a direct implementation of the Bellman optimality equation.
18. Plot the optimal trajectory.
19. ( *) Are all the optimal solutions you computed above identical? Explain why
they are or they are not identical.
20. ( *) Describe the most efficient solution for policy iteration you have run. Was
it standard policy iteration, truncated policy iteration, value iteration? How
did you sort your states during the policy evaluation step?
5